One of the major differences between Snort 2 and Snort 3 is the
configuration. Snort 2 configuration files are written in Snort-specific
syntax while Snort 3 configuration files are written in Lua. Snort2Lua is a
program specifically designed to convert valid Snort 2 configuration files
into Lua files that Snort 3 can understand.

Snort2Lua reads your legacy Snort conf file(s) and generates Snort 3 Lua
and rules files. When running this program, the only mandatory option is to
provide Snort2Lua with a Snort 2 configuration file. The default output
file file is snort.lua, the default error file will be snort.rej, and the
default rule file is the output file (default is snort.lua).  When
Snort2Lua finishes running, the resulting configuration file can be
successfully run as the Snort3.0 configuration file.  The sole exception to
this rule is when Snort2Lua cannot find an included file.  If that occurs,
the file will still be included in the output file and you will need to
manually adjust or comment the file name. Additionally, if the exit code is
not zero, some of the information may not be successfully converted.  Check
the error file for all of the conversion problems.

Those errors can occur for a multitude of reasons and are not necessarily
bad. Snort2Lua expects a valid Snort 2 configuration.  Therefore, if the
configuration is invalid or has questionable syntax, Snort2Lua may fail to
parse the configuration file or create an invalid Snort 3 configuration
file.

There are a also few peculiarities of Snort2Lua that may be confusing to a
first time user:

* Aside from an initial configuration file (which is specified from the
  command line or as the file in ‘config binding’), every file that is
  included into Snort 3 must be either a Lua file or a rule file; the file
  cannot contain both rules and Lua syntax.  Therefore, when parsing a file
  specified with the ‘include’ command, Snort2Lua will output both a Lua
  file and a rule file.

* Any line that is a comment in a configuration file will be added in to a
  comments section at the bottom of the main configuration file.

* Rules that contain unsupported options will be converted to the best of
  Snort2Lua’s capability and then printed as a comment in the rule file.

* Files with a '.rules' suffix are assumed to be Talos 2.X rules files and
  converted line-by-line.  In this case, lines starting with 'alert' are
  converted as usual but lines starting with '# alert' are
  assumed to be commented out rules which are converted to 3.0 format and
  remain comments in the output file.  All other comments are passed
  through directly.  There is no support for other commented rule actions
  since these do not appear in Talos rules files.

=== Snort2Lua Command Line

By default, Snort2Lua will attempt to parse every ‘include’ file and every
‘binding’ file.  There is an option to change this functionality.

When specifying a rule file with one of the command line options, Snort2Lua
will output all of the converted rules to that specified rule file.  This
is especially useful when you are only interesting in converting rules
since there is no Lua syntax in rule files.  There is also an option that
tells Snort2Lua to output every rule for a given configuration into a
single rule file.  Similarly, there is an option pull all of the Lua syntax
from every ‘include’ file into the output file.

There are currently three output modes: default, quiet, and differences.
As expected, quiet mode produces a Snort configuration.  All errors (aside
from Fatal Snort2Lua errors), differences, and comments will omitted from
the final output file.  Default mode will print everything. That mean you
will be able to see exactly what changes have occurred between Snort 2 and
Snort 3 in addition to the new syntax, the original file's comments, and
all errors that have occurred.  Finally, differences mode will not actually
output a valid Snort 3 configuration.  Instead, you can see the exact
options from the input configuration that have changed.

:leveloffset: 1
include::snort2lua_cmds.txt[]
:leveloffset: 0

=== Known Problems

*  Any Snort 2 ‘string’ which is dependent on a variable will no longer
   have that variable in the Lua string.

*  Snort2Lua currently does not handle variables well. First, that means
   variables will not always be parsed correctly.  Second, sometimes a
   variables value will be output in the lua file rather than a variable
   For instance, if Snort2Lua attempted to convert the line 'include
   $RULE_PATH/example.rule', the output may output 'include
   /etc/rules/example.rule' instead.

*  When Snort2Lua parses a ‘binding’ configuration file, the rules and
   configuration will automatically be combined into the same file.  Also,
   the new files name will automatically become the old file’s name with a
   .lua extension.  There is currently no way to specify or change that
   files name.

*  If a rule's action is a custom ruletype, that rule action will be
   silently converted to the rultype's 'type'. No warnings or errors are
   currently emitted. Additionally, the custom ruletypes outputs will be
   silently discarded.

*  If the original configuration contains a binding that points to another
   file and the binding file contains an error, Snort2Lua will output the
   number of rejects for the binding file in addition to the number of
   rejects in the main file.  The two numbers will eventually be combined
   into one output.

=== Usage

Snort2Lua is included in the Snort 3 distribution. The Snort2Lua source
code is located in the tools/snort2lua directory. The program is
automatically built and installed.

Translating your configuration

To run Snort2Lua, the only requirement is a file containing Snort 2 syntax.
Assuming your configuration file is named snort.conf, run the command

    snort2lua –c snort.conf

Snort2Lua will output a file named snort.lua. Assuming your snort.conf file
is a valid Snort 2 configuration file, than the resulting snort.lua file
will always be a valid Snort 3 configuration file; any errors that occur
are because Snort 3 currently does not support all of the Snort 2 options.

Every keyword from the Snort configuration can be found in the output file.
If the option or keyword has changed, then a comment containing both the
option or keyword’s old name and new name will be present in the output
file.

Translating a rule file

Snort2Lua can also accommodate translating individual rule files. Assuming
the Snort 2 rule file is named snort.rules and you want the new rule file
to be name updated.rules, run the command

    snort2lua –c snort.rules -r updated.rules

Snort2Lua will output a file named updated.rules. That file, updated.rules,
will always be a valid Snort 3 rule file. Any rule that contains
unsupported options will be a comment in the output file.

Understanding the Output

Although Snort2Lua outputs very little to the console, there are several
things that occur when Snort2Lua runs.  This is a list of Snort2Lua
outputs.

_The console_.   Every line that Snort2Lua is unable to translate from the
Snort 2.X format to the Snort 3 format is considered an error. Upon
exiting, Snort2Lua will print the number of errors that occurred. Snort2Lua
will also print the name of the error file. 

_The output file_.  As previously mentioned, Snort2Lua will create a Lua
file with valid Snort 3 syntax.  The default Lua file is named snort.lua.
This file is the equivalent of your main Snort 2 configuration file.

_The rule file_.   By default, all rules will be printed to the Lua file.
However, if a rule file is specified on the command line, any rules found
in the Snort 2 configuration will be written to the rule file instead

_The error file_.  By default, the error file is snort.rej. It will only be
created if errors exist.  Every error referenced on the command line can be
found in this file.  There are two reasons an error can occur.

* The Snort 2 configuration file has invalid syntax. If Snort 2 cannot
  parse the configuration file, neither can Snort2Lua.  In the example below,
  Snort2Lua could not convert the line 'config bad_option'.  Since that is not
  valid Snort 2 syntax, this is a syntax error.
    
* The Snort 2 configuration file contains preprocessors and rule options
  that are not supported in Snort 3.  If Snort 2 can parse a line that
  Snort2Lua cannot parse, than Snort 3 does not support something in the line.
  As Snort 3 begins supporting these preprocessors and rule options, Snort2Lua
  will also begin translating these lines. One example of such an error is
  dcerpc2.

Additional .lua and .rules files. Every time Snort2Lua parses the include
or binding keyword, the program will attempt to parse the file referenced
by the keyword.  Snort2Lua will then create one or two new files.  The new
files will have a .lua or .rules extension appended to the original
filename.

