The HTTP/2 inspector (H2I) converts HTTP/2 frames into HTTP/1.1 message sections and feeds them
to the new HTTP inspector (NHI) for further processing.

The Http2StreamSplitter strips the frame headers from the frame data and stores them in separate
buffers. As in NHI, long data frames are split into 16kb chunks for inspection. If a header frame
is followed by continuation frames, all the header frames are flushed together for inspection. The
frame headers from each frame are stored contiguously in the frame_header buffer. After cutting out
the frame headers, the frame data is stored as a single block, consisting of the HPACK encoded
HTTP/2 headers.

HTTP/2 headers frames can come at the start of a stream and contain the header block, or at the end
of a stream and contain trailers. H2I contains headers frame subclasses Http2HeadersFrameHeader and
Http2HeadersFrameTrailer to support these two types of headers frames. Headers frames containing the
header block will contain pseudo-headers that must be converted into an HTTP/1.1 start line in
addition to regular HTTP/1.1 headers. The two Http2StartLine subclasses, Http2RequestLine and
Http2ResponseLine perform this translation and generate the start-line, which is stored in a new
buffer inside the Http2StartLine object. Trailers may only contain regular headers. 

Both headers and trailers must undergo HPACK decoding before being sent to NHI for processing. To
perform decoding, reassemble() makes a first copy of the encoded headers, which is stored in the
frame_data buffer. The frame_data buffer is passed to the function decode_headers(), which is the
main loop driving HPACK decoding. Each decoded header line is progressively written to a second
decoded_headers buffer that will ultimately be sent to NHI.

The main loop in decode_headers() finds the cut point for a single header line. The line is is
passed to decode_header_line(), which parses the line and calls the appropriate decoding function
based on the header representation type. If the type is indexed, the full header line is looked up
in the table and copied to the decoded header buffer. The index may belong to either the static or
the dynamic table. The static table is 61-elements defined in the HPACK RFC. The dynamic table,
which starts at index 62, is specific to each direction of each flow. For the second type, literal
to be indexed, the header name may be indexed or a string literal, while the value is always a
literal. The resulting header line is then added to the dynamic table. The third representation type
is literal not to be indexed, which is the same as literal to be indexed, except the header line is
not added to the dynamic table.

H2I supports the NHI test tool. See ../http_inspect/dev_notes.txt for usage instructions.

Memory requirements: Http2FlowData represents all H2I information in a flow. It does not account 
for the entries in the hpack dynamic table. The formula below estimates the size of an entry 
in the dynamic table:
name.length() + value.length() + RFC_ENTRY_OVERHEAD (32 as defined by the RFC)

Using the formula and some sample pcaps, the average size of the dynamic table is 1645 bytes.
Dynamically allocated objects related to http_inspect are considered separate and are not 
included. Temporary objects (frame_data and frame_header) are ignored. The remaining dynamically
allocated are Http2Infractions (8 bytes * 2) and Http2EventsGen(24 bytes * 2)
Therefore, the memory required by http2 per flow: sizeof(Http2FlowData) + 1645 + 16 + 48 
